Improve Modular Code pattern (#475)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: patterns/1-initial/modular-code.md

## Problem

* With rare exceptions, monolythinc code is difficult to contribute to.
* The same functionality is reimplemented redundantly causing
  * Waste of unneeded re-design and re-development
  * Duplicated mainteinance effort

## Context

> * There might be potentially reusable functionality buried in monolythic code.

Reviewer: monolithic

Reviewer 2: Hi @NewMexicoKid. Not sure if you have seen that GitHub feature yet.

When commenting you can hit the ![Screenshot 2022-10-26 at 18 09 58 ](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/163029/198078602-5dd1f1b0-e9cc-4c6f-b80b-e25748e7def8.png)  symbol at the top of the comment box and suggest specific changes.
That allows the authors to clearly understand what you are referring to. Plus if the change doesn't need further conversation they can just click "commit" and are done :)

Below a screenshot of the button that I am referring to:

![Screenshot 2022-10-26 at 18 08 05 ](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/163029/198078268-07378837-6f99-4cb5-9dab-c200d0b587bb.png)

  * Select certain "success projects", teams that will develop reusable code and demonstrate the long term success. This can help motivate others (they see what is possible and what is in it for them). Transparency is critical.
* Introduce refactoring as organic effort and strive for it to become part of the culture.
  * Acknowledge and drive acceptance for the investion of modularization. Build time into the release schedule for this.
* Search for modularizable functionalities:
  * Identify common functionalities and code blocks with potential for profitable modularity.
  * Establish a checklist of elements to be checked off to classify a component as reusable.
    There could be requirements on tests, tools and documentation before considering a component as reusable.
    Establish standards on testing methodology, labeling of repos.
* Eat the elephant in small bites. Break modularization down into baby steps, like
  1. find internal would-be customers. Better ask them over guessing on your own.
  1. define decoupling scope and prefferred decoupling methods,
  1. develop automated testing protection
  1. document usage of modules.

> 

Reviewer 3: I spoke to @fioddor about this and I wish to add one more line here which I think is super useful
```suggestion
* More information and techniques are available from the book Working Effectively with Legacy Code by Michael Feathers and Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code by Martin Fowler

```

  * Select certain "success projects", teams that will develop reusable code and demonstrate the long term success. This can help motivate others (they see what is possible and what is in it for them). Transparency is critical.
* Introduce refactoring as organic effort and strive for it to become part of the culture.
  * Acknowledge and drive acceptance for the investion of modularization. Build time into the release schedule for this.
* Search for modularizable functionalities:
  * Identify common functionalities and code blocks with potential for profitable modularity.
  * Establish a checklist of elements to be checked off to classify a component as reusable.
    There could be requirements on tests, tools and documentation before considering a component as reusable.
    Establish standards on testing methodology, labeling of repos.
* Eat the elephant in small bites. Break modularization down into baby steps, like
  1. find internal would-be customers. Better ask them over guessing on your own.
  1. define decoupling scope and prefferred decoupling methods,
  1. develop automated testing protection

>   1. document usage of modules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  1. document usage of modules.
  1. introduce semantic versioning
  1. use a dependency management software such as pip, nuget, npm
```

> * More information and techniques are available from the book Working Effectively with Legacy Code by Michael Feathers and Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code by Martin Fowler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* More information and techniques are available from the book **Working Effectively with Legacy Code** by Michael Feathers and **Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code** by Martin Fowler
```

Add some formatting for the book references

## Problem

> * With rare exceptions, monolithinc code is difficult to contribute to.
> * The same functionality is reimplemented redundantly causing
>   * Waste of unneeded re-design and re-development
>   * Duplicated mainteinance effort

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With rare exceptions, monolithic code is difficult to contribute to and extend.
That leads development teams to build similar functionality multiple times, leading to both waste (unneeded re-design and re-development) as well as duplicated maintenance effort.
```

Reviewer 2: In terms of formatting, I am suggesting to not use bullets here. We already have enough bullets in the other sections :)

Also fixed some typos and rewrote the Problem statement a bit.

Author: Typos and formatting: ok

I see that _monolithic code_ might be a cause for _redundant implementation_, but it is not always so.  Redundant implementation might happen for other reasons, so I'd keep it as another problem that modularization solves.

Reviewer 2: Sorry but I could not follow your train of thought here, please help me :)

Are you saying that your lines 11 and 12 above are describing two distinct unrelated problems, that can be improved through more modular code?

Author: Yes, 2 different problems:

1. Monolithic code packing much functionality makes it difficult to contribute (much to read, much to grasp, much to test, much to review, and much to document). Finding slots and the right mood to attack big chunks of work is difficult. This is regardless of how many other alternative implementations you have.
2. Redundant implementations tend to be a waste of effort developing, documenting, and maintaining them all.

Strictly speaking, modularity is about reusing parts (modules) and solves redundancy.

But engineering the parts to be small and narrow-focused (breaking the monolith) helps a lot in fostering collaboration. More so in the case of volunteer collaboration.

## Context

* There might be potentially reusable functionality buried in monolithic code.
  Legacy code tends to be less modular than new one.
* There is an available repository for sharing code.

> * Source code can be a useful as documentation on small enough pieces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Source code can be as useful as documentation on small enough pieces.
```

* Documentation needed for getting started using a small piece of code is easy to write.
* Time commitments might already have been made for customer deliveries (not changeable).
* The value of modularity is nearly invisible for end users.

## Forces

* Against:
  * Developers who develop monolithic code bases might lack the perspective of how modularity might improve how they work.
  * Developers might not know how to write modular code.
  * You might be dealing with legacy systems. Might be a fear that if not done properly, quality might be impacted.
  * Architectural constraints might impact modularity.
  * The value of modularity is nearly invisible for end users.

> * In favour:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In favor:
```

Switching to American English (AE)

  * Frequent turnover of team members speaks for modularization, as it helps newcomers to learn about the system at smaller bits.
* Neutral / Two-folded:
  * Some companies have a common components group that develops reusable code, but others feel that such components should be developed by those business lines that are using the components and a library of common components could be established.
  * Level of communication between teams can impact ability/inclination to modularize.

## Solutions

Modular code is far more reusable. Decoupling functionality into smaller narrow-focused modules eases
and therefore promotes external contributions and onboarding of newcomers.

* Offer education.
  * On why: Lack of modularity is technical debt. It increases costs but hides them by shifting these into the future.
  * On how: Modular code is well-understood; there is a lot of literature in favor of this.
  * Select certain "success projects", teams that will develop reusable code and demonstrate the long term success. This can help motivate others (they see what is possible and what is in it for them). Transparency is critical.

> * Introduce refactoring as organic effort and strive for it to become part of the culture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Introduce refactoring as an organic effort and strive for it to become part of the culture.
```

>   * Acknowledge and drive acceptance for the investion of modularization. Build time into the release schedule for this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Acknowledge and drive acceptance for the investment in modularization. Build time into the release schedule for this.
```

* Search for modularizable functionalities:
  * Identify common functionalities and code blocks with potential for profitable modularity.
  * Establish a checklist of elements to be checked off to classify a component as reusable.
    There could be requirements on tests, tools and documentation before considering a component as reusable.
    Establish standards on testing methodology, labeling of repos.
* Eat the elephant in small bites. Break modularization down into baby steps, like
  1. find internal would-be customers. Better ask them over guessing on your own.

>   1. define decoupling scope and prefferred decoupling methods,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. define decoupling scope and preferred decoupling methods,
```

  1. develop automated testing protection
  1. document usage of modules.
  1. introduce semantic versioning
  1. use a dependency management software such as pip, nuget, npm
* More information and techniques are available from the book **Working Effectively with Legacy Code** by Michael Feathers and **Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code** by Martin Fowler

## Resulting Context

> * Modular code facilitates division of paralell labour (as required for work in larger teams, or as an open source project). Modular projects enable team members to focus on their own smaller assigned tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Modular code facilitates division of parallel labor (as required for work in larger teams, or as an open source project).
* Modular projects enable team members to focus on their own smaller assigned tasks.
```

Fixed spelling in first sentence. Also changed "labor" to American English.

Would it make sense to break out the 2nd sentence into its own bullet?

> * Modular code makes Agile implementation easier.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "Agile implementation" in this context? e.g. it could mean something similar to the "smaller assigned tasks" above but I am not sure.

Author: Smaller grains make sand more fluid.

Agile relies on small iterations. Smaller codebase bits and atomic unit tests provide more alternative combinations which in turn allows to pack more work into timeboxed sprints. It also helps when replanning. And smaller bits have smaller scopes (less to learn and document), so user stories get more specific (less to discuss).

For the same functionality, you'll need to change more bits, but the modularity helps to materialize sooner (earlier and more reliable validations) and to prioritize the most relevant bits (separate value from waste).

Author: It's all about smaller tasks, but the value provided by making tasks smaller is different.

Reviewer 2: > Smaller grains make sand more fluid.

⬆️ love that! Had not heard that expression before but it is a great mental picture.

I can see that it might be hard to pack your whole statement into row 72. Still wondering if we could add some of it? e.g.

> Modular code makes Agile implementation easier e.g. by allowing for smaller iterations and through that earlier customer feedback.

Reviewer 2: Saw the changes the Agile bit. Fantastic!

## Problem

With rare exceptions, monolithinc code is difficult to contribute to as it packs much functionality (much to read, much to grasp, much to test, much to review, and much to document). Finding slots and the right mood to attack big chunks of work is difficult.

The same functionality is reimplemented redundantly causing waste of unneeded re-design and re-development and duplicated mainteinance effort.

> Sometimes the first problem causes the second, but it might also happen spontaneously.

Reviewer 2: 👍

## Context

* There might be potentially reusable functionality buried in monolithic code.

>   Legacy code tends to be less modular than new one.

Reviewer 2: Is this meant to be it's own bullet, or should it be part of the previous one?

If the latter, then we need to check after publishing this whether gitbook renders this correctly. I vaguely recall some behavior there where GitHub and gitbook rendering of markdown differ.

> * There might be potentially reusable functionality buried in monolithic code.
>   Legacy code tends to be less modular than new one.

Author: ```suggestion
* There might be potentially reusable functionality buried in monolithic code. Legacy code tends to be less modular than new one.
```

Reviewer 2: ✅

  * Companies moving to use more open source code will appreciate modularity more over time.
  * Code protected through reliable automated testing offers a chance for newcomers to safely have an impact by refactoring. Modularization is a powerful goal for refactoring. And refactoring usually drags additional benefits.
  * Frequent turnover of team members speaks for modularization, as it helps newcomers to learn about the system at smaller bits.
* Neutral / Two-folded:
  * Some companies have a common components group that develops reusable code, but others feel that such components should be developed by those business lines that are using the components and a library of common components could be established.
  * Level of communication between teams can impact ability/inclination to modularize.

## Solutions

Modular code is far more reusable. Decoupling functionality into smaller narrow-focused modules eases
and therefore promotes external contributions and onboarding of newcomers.

* Offer education.
  * On why: Lack of modularity is technical debt. It increases costs but hides them by shifting these into the future.

>   * On how: Modular code is well-understood; there is a lot of literature in favor of this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * On how: Modular code is well-understood; there is a lot of literature in favor of this that can be used for training.
```

Reviewer 2: ✅

>   * Select certain "success projects", teams that will develop reusable code and demonstrate the long term success. This can help motivate others (they see what is possible and what is in it for them). Transparency is critical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Select certain "success projects", teams that have developed reusable code and can demonstrate the long term success. This can help motivate others, as they see what is possible and what is in it for them. Learning directly from other developers is critical.
```

Changes:

* Would you select teams here that have already applied modularization successfully in the past, or rather some that want to do so on the future? I suspect the former, and have changed the tense accordingly.
* Removed the brackets
* Changed the last sentence significantly here. Wondering if this is more precise than "transparency"?
 
This is all your text though, so you decide if you like any of this.

Reviewer 2: ✅

* Introduce refactoring as an organic effort and strive for it to become part of the culture.
  * Acknowledge and drive acceptance for the investment in modularization. Build time into the release schedule for this.
* Search for modularizable functionalities:
  * Identify common functionalities and code blocks with potential for profitable modularity.
  * Establish a checklist of elements to be checked off to classify a component as reusable.
    There could be requirements on tests, tools and documentation before considering a component as reusable.
    Establish standards on testing methodology, labeling of repos.
* Eat the elephant in small bites. Break modularization down into baby steps, like

>   1. find internal would-be customers. Better ask them over guessing on your own.
>   1. define decoupling scope and preferred decoupling methods,
>   1. develop automated testing protection
>   1. document usage of modules.
>   1. introduce semantic versioning
>   1. use a dependency management software such as pip, nuget, npm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. Find internal would-be customers. Better ask them over guessing on your own.
  1. Define decoupling scope and preferred decoupling methods.
  1. Develop automated testing protection.
  1. Document usage of modules.
  1. Introduce semantic versioning.
  1. Use a dependency management software such as pip, nuget, npm.
```

I think we should start all points with capital letters, to be consistent with the rest of the pattern.
Also added punctuation after each bullet point.

One question:

This is the only part of the pattern where we use a numbered list.
Is this on purpose? i.e. is there an order to this?

Reviewer 2: @fioddor This is the only part of the pattern where we use a numbered list.
Is this on purpose? i.e. are these points meant to be used in this order?

Author: Arguably yes. I thought of a sequence, but it isn't the only possible one, so I don't have a strong opinion.

Reviewer 2: Got it. Let's keep it as is then, and see if it sticks :)

> * More information and techniques are available from the book **Working Effectively with Legacy Code** by Michael Feathers and **Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code** by Martin Fowler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* More information and techniques are available from the book **Working Effectively with Legacy Code** by Michael Feathers and **Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code** by Martin Fowler.
```

We could add links to the books as well?

- https://martinfowler.com/books/refactoring.html
- https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/working-effectively-with/0131177052/

Never quite sure if links are a good or a bad thing in such cases.

At least the 1st link contains some extra info from the author, i.e. it doesn't "just" sell the book :)

Reviewer 2: @fioddor wasn't sure if you caught this comment, so reopening it.

Do you think links could be helpful here?

Author: [Yes](https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/pull/475/commits/dd08553415c70ff11cb7a24570cfa09703802d6b).
